MTM-49410 As a customer I need a MQTT Connect user documentation guide (#1405)
SoftwareAG/c8y-docs: content/device-integration/mqtt-connect-bundle/implementation.md

---
weight: 20
title: MQTT protocol implementation
layout: redirect
---

This section lists the implementation details for MQTT Connect. The MQTT Connect implementation supports MQTT Version 3.1.1, support for 5.0 is planned.

> ### Connecting via MQTT {#mqtt-connect-connection}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Connecting via MQTT {#connecting-via-mqtt}
```

MQTT Connect is supported via TCP. Use your tenant domain as the URL.

Available ports:

| &nbsp; | TCP |
|:-----|:----|
| TLS | 9883 |
| no TLS | 2883 |

Port 9883 is enabled by default, it currently supports one-way SSL meaning that only the client validates the server certificate to ensure its identity.

> Client is authenticated by the server with the usage of standard username and password credentials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The client is authenticated by the server with the usage of standard username and password credentials.
```
"with the usage of" could this be shortened to "via"?

Author: Yes, we can change this. I will do this directly in the suggestion.

To enable port 2883 please contact [product support](/additional-resources/contacting-support/).

> ### Topic {#mqtt-connect-topic}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Topic {#topic}
```

MQTT Connect topics are mapped to the Messaging Service subscriptions of the same name.
The Messaging Service subscriptions reliably store the topic messages for asynchronous processing.

> The messages stored on these subscriptions can be consumed using dedicated [Java Client](/device-integration/mqtt-connect#java-client).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The messages stored on these subscriptions can be consumed using a dedicated [Java Client](/device-integration/mqtt-connect#java-client).
```
not sure if "a" or "the" is better here

Author: Not sure either, but "a" sounds better to me ;)

> #### Topic restrictions {#mqtt-connect-topic-restrictions}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Topic restrictions {#topic-restrictions}
```

MQTT Connect does not impose any topic structure. There are just a few topic names which are reserved for historic purposes and future use, namely:
* all [SmartREST 2.0](/smartrest/smartrest-two) related topics
* `error`
* `devicecontrol/notifications`

> Beside of that you are free to use any topic name which is compatible with [MQTT specification](http://docs.oasis-open.org/mqtt/mqtt/v3.1.1/os/mqtt-v3.1.1-os.html#_Toc398718106).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other than that you are free to use any topic name which is compatible with the [MQTT specification](http://docs.oasis-open.org/mqtt/mqtt/v3.1.1/os/mqtt-v3.1.1-os.html#_Toc398718106).
```

{{< c8y-admon-info >}}
Wildcard topics are not supported.

Only alphanumeric characters and slash (`/`) can be used in topic name.
{{< /c8y-admon-info >}}

> ### Payload {#mqtt-connect-payload}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Payload {#payload}
```

> Original MQTT messages are re-packed into MQTT Connect message format which beside of the original payload contains additional metadata fields.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The original MQTT messages are re-packed into MQTT Connect message format which includes the original payload and additional metadata fields.
```

> Original MQTT message is re-packed into MQTT Connect message format which beside of original payload contains additional metadata fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Original MQTT messages are re-packed into MQTT Connect message format which beside of the original payload contains additional metadata fields.
```

Assuming Java types, the packed message structure looks as follows:

`MqttMessage`
| Field name | Type         | Description                |
|:-----------|:-------------|:---------------------------|

> | payload    | byte[]       | MQTT Payload               |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| payload    | byte[]       | MQTT payload               |
```

> | metadata   | MqttMetadata | Metadata from MQTT message |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| metadata   | MqttMetadata | Metadata from the MQTT message |
```

`MqttMetadata`
| Field name             | Type    | Description                                                           |
|:-----------------------|:--------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| clientId               | String  | Unique MQTT client identifier, usually used as an external identifier |

> | messageId              | int     | Unique MQTT message id per client, available only with QoS 1 and 2    |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| messageId              | int     | Unique MQTT message ID per client, available only with QoS 1 and 2    |
```

| dupFlag                | boolean | Indicates this message is a resend by the MQTT client                 |
| userProperties         | Map     | Reserved for future use of MQTT 5.0 features                          |
| payloadFormatIndicator | enum    | Reserved for future use of MQTT 5.0 features                          |
| contentType            | String  | Reserved for future use of MQTT 5.0 features                          |
| correlationData        | byte[]  | Reserved for future use of MQTT 5.0 features                          |
| responseTopic          | String  | Reserved for future use of MQTT 5.0 features                          |

The [Java Client](/device-integration/mqtt-connect#java-client) contains classes representing the above model.

> #### Payload restrictions {#mqtt-connect-payload-restrictions}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Payload restrictions {#payload-restrictions}
```

> MQTT Connect doesn`t force you to use any specific payload format. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MQTT Connect doesn't force you to use any specific payload format. 
```

All the incoming MQTT messages must meet the specification in terms of fixed and variable headers, but the payload for published messages is unrestricted.
Just keep in mind that you will receive exactly the same set of bytes which was sent from the device in your custom microservice
and you have to convert them to {{< product-c8y-iot >}} compatible format.

{{< c8y-admon-info >}}
For all MQTT connections to the platform, the maximum accepted payload size is 1048576 bytes (1 MiB), which includes
both message header and body. The header size varies, but its minimum is 2 bytes.
{{< /c8y-admon-info >}}

> ### Features {#mqtt-connect-features}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Features {#features}
```

> #### Authentication {#mqtt-connect-authentication}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Authentication {#authentication}
```

Authentication types supported by MQTT Connect are:

> *   Username and password. The MQTT username needs to include the tenant ID and username in the format &lt;tenantID&gt;/&lt;username&gt;.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Username and password. The MQTT username must include the tenant ID and username in the format `<tenantID>/<username>`.
```

*   Device certificates - not yet supported. This will be added in a future release.

> #### ClientId {#mqtt-connect-client-id}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### ClientId {#client-id}
```

> The MQTT ClientId field identifies the connected client. ClientId may consist up to 128 alphanumeric characters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MQTT ClientId field identifies the connected client. ClientId may consist of up to 128 alphanumeric characters.
```

> Each client connecting to the MQTT Connect must have a unique client identifier, connecting a second client with the same identifier will result in the previous client`s disconnection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each client connecting to MQTT Connect must have a unique client identifier, connecting a second client with the same identifier will result in the previous client's disconnection.
```

> #### Quality of Service (QoS) {#mqtt-connect-qos}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Quality of Service (QoS) {#quality-of-service-qos}
```

> The {{< product-c8y-iot >}} implementation supports 2 levels of MQTT QoS:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {{< product-c8y-iot >}} implementation supports two levels of MQTT QoS:
```

* QoS 0: At most once:
    - The client just sends the message once (fire and forget).
    - No response from the server.
    - No guarantee that subscribers will receive the message.
* QoS 1: At least once
    - The client awaits server acknowledgment for each published message.

>     - The client should re-send the message if there was no ack from the server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The client should re-send the message if there was no acknowledgement from the server.
```

>     - Guaranteed that subscribers will receive a message that was acknowledged by the server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - It is guaranteed that subscribers will receive a message that was acknowledged by the server.
```

    - Subscribers may receive more than one copy of a message.
* QoS 2: Exactly once - not supported

> For subscriptions, we will deliver all messages in the QoS that the client defined when subscribing to the topic.

Reviewer: who is "we"?
Cumulocity IoT? MQTT Connect?

Author: we == MQTT Connect
Replaced.

> For subscriptions, we will deliver all messages in the QoS that the client defined when subscribing to the topic.

Author: ```suggestion
For subscriptions, MQTT Connect will deliver all messages in the QoS that the client defined when subscribing to the topic.
```

> #### Clean session {#mqtt-connect-clean-session}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Clean session {#clean-session}
```

MQTT Connect requires clean session to be set to "1" (true). We cannot guarantee that disabling clean session will work reliably, hence we recommend you to always enable clean session.

> #### Retained flag {#mqtt-connect-retained-flag}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Retained flag {#retained-flag}
```

Retained flag is ignored, publishing data with the retained flag on the topic is allowed but has no practical difference to sending it without the flag.

#### Last will {#mqtt-connect-last-will}

In MQTT, the "last will" is a message that is specified at connection time and that is executed when the client loses the connection. 
Last will is fully supported by MQTT Connect and like with any other publish messages you can use any unreserved topic and any payload.

### Return codes {#mqtt-connect-return-codes}

MQTT Connect follows the MQTT specification for server responses. For example, if invalid credentials are sent in the `CONNECT` message,

> the server response `CONNACK` message will contain the `0x05` return code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the server response `CONNACK` message contains the `0x05` return code.
```

---
weight: 20

> title: Implementation

Author: Changed to `MQTT protocol implementation`

### Connecting via MQTT {#mqtt-connect-connection}

MQTT Connect is supported via TCP. Use your tenant domain as the URL.

Available ports:

| &nbsp; | TCP |
|:-----|:----|
| SSL | 9883 |
| no SSL | 2883 |

Port 9883 is enabled by default, it supports one-way SSL meaning only client validates the server certificate to ensure his identity.
Client is authenticated by the server with the usage of standard username and password credentials.
To enable port 2883 please contact [product support](/additional-resources/contacting-support/).

### Topic {#mqtt-connect-topic}

MQTT Connect topics are mapped 1:1 to Messaging Service subscriptions of the same name.
The Messaging Service subscriptions reliably store the topic messages for asynchronous processing.
The messages stored on these subscriptions can be consumed using the [Notifications 2.0 API](https://{{< domain-c8y >}}/api/core/{{< c8y-current-version >}}/#tag/Notification-2.0-API),
however it is much simpler to use the dedicated [Java Client](/device-integration/mqtt-connect#java-client), which just requires a token to consume messages.

#### Topic restrictions {#mqtt-connect-topic-restrictions}

> MQTT Connect does not impose any topic structure. There are just a few topic names which are reserved for historic purposes and future use, such as all the [SmartREST 2.0](/smartrest/smartrest-two) related topics.

Author: Listing them would be cumbersome, all SmartREST related topics - `s/up`, `t/up`, `q/ul`, `s/ul`, `t/ul`, `q/ud`, `q/uc`, `t/ud`, `s/uc`, `s/ud`, `q/uat`, `t/uc`, `s/ucr`, `t/udp`, `c/ddp`, `q/dcr`, `t/dat`, `c/uat`, `t/ucr`, `q/e`, `c/dcr`, `c/dt`, `c/ds`, `t/e`, `c/dp`, `s/ddp`, `c/dl`, `q/dp`, `q/dt`, `q/ds`, `t/dt`, `s/ds`, `s/dt`, `c/dd`, `c/dc`, `t/ds`, `q/udp`, `s/dp`, `t/dp`, `q/dl`, `s/uat`, `s/dl`, `t/dl`, `q/dd`, `q/dc`, `t/dd`, `s/dd`, `s/dc`, `t/dc`, `q/dat`, `s/dcr`, `t/ddp`, `c/udp`, `s/e`, `q/ucr`, `t/uat`, `c/dat`, `t/dcr`, `c/e`, `c/ucr`, `c/ut`, `c/us`, `c/up`, `s/udp`, `c/ul`, `q/up`, `q/ut`, `q/us`, `t/ut`, `q/ddp`, `c/uc`, `c/ud`, `s/dat`, `s/ut`, `s/us`, `t/us`

I just reorganized it into a bullet list with two additional topics that I missed originally.

---
weight: 20
title: Implementation
layout: redirect
---

> This section lists the implementation details for the MQTT Connect. The MQTT Connect implementation supports MQTT Version 3.1.1, support for 5.0 will be added soon.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section lists the implementation details for MQTT Connect. The MQTT Connect implementation supports MQTT Version 3.1.1, support for 5.0 will be added soon.
```

### Connecting via MQTT {#mqtt-connect-connection}

MQTT Connect is supported via TCP. As URL you can use your tenant domain.

Available ports:

| &nbsp; | TCP |
|:-----|:----|
| SSL | 9883 |
| no SSL | 2883 |

> Port 9883 is enabled by default and it supports one-way SSL using username and password for client authorization.

Reviewer 2: thought: I had to look up one-way SSL as I wasn't sure what it was (server auth only, no client auth). I would have suggested making it a link to wikipedia or similar, but couldn't find a suitable (non-commercial) resource to link it to. I guess customer will have to Google it themselves!

To enable port 2883 please contact [product support](/additional-resources/contacting-support/).

### Topic {#mqtt-connect-topic}

> 

Reviewer 2: suggestion: rewrite of the following paragraph (rather then a suggestion per line)

MQTT Connect topics are mapped 1:1 to Messaging Service subscriptions of the same name. The Messaging Service subscriptions reliably store the topic messages for asynchronous processing. The messages stored on these subscriptions can be consumed using the [Notifications 2.0 API](https://{{< domain-c8y >}}/api/core/{{< c8y-current-version >}}/#tag/Notification-2.0-API), however it is much simpler to use the dedicated [Java Client](/device-integration/mqtt-connect#java-client), which just requires a token to consume messages .

As you probably notice MQTT topics are mapped 1:1 to the Messaging Service subscription. Thanks to this we can easily

> utilize [Notifications 2.0 API](https://{{< domain-c8y >}}/api/core/{{< c8y-current-version >}}/#tag/Notification-2.0-API)

Reviewer 3: For now, don't mention Notification 2.0 API here. We have a Java client in place to abstract these things. How we would explain support for other language clients in TBD. If anything, they will just need to use Token API - not the entire Notifications 2.0 feature.

to consume messages from the MQTT devices. There is no need to create dedicated
Notifications 2.0 subscription, MQTT Connect will do this for you. Just obtain the token and use it to consume messages
or even better use dedicated [Java Client](/device-integration/mqtt-connect#java-client).

#### Topic restrictions {#mqtt-connect-topic-restrictions}

> MQTT Connect does not impose any topic structure. There is just a few topic names which are reserved for the future use, namely all [SmartREST 2.0](/smartrest/smartrest-two) related topics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MQTT Connect does not impose any topic structure. There are just a few topic names which are reserved for historic purposes the future use, such as all the [SmartREST 2.0](/smartrest/smartrest-two) related topics.
```

Beside of that you are free to use any topic name which is compatible with [MQTT specification](http://docs.oasis-open.org/mqtt/mqtt/v3.1.1/os/mqtt-v3.1.1-os.html#_Toc398718106).

{{< c8y-admon-info >}}
Wildcard topics are not supported.

Only alphanumeric characters and slash (`/`) can be used in topic name.
{{< /c8y-admon-info >}}

### Payload {#mqtt-connect-payload}

> 

Reviewer 2: suggestion: we can simplify the following paragraph I think

'MQTT Connect messages are packed, together with additional metadata, into [Apache AVRO](https://avro.apache.org/) binary format messages, before being sent sent to the Messaging Service.
Assuming Java types, the packed message structure looks as follows:'

Unlike the topics mapping, MQTT messages are not sent directly to the Messaging Service. Instead of this MQTT payload is packed
together with additional metadata and sent to the Messaging Service in [Apache AVRO](https://avro.apache.org/) binary format.
Assuming Java types, the message structure looks as follows:

`MqttMessage`
| Field name | Type         | Description                |
|:-----------|:-------------|:---------------------------|
| payload    | byte[]       | MQTT Payload               |
| metadata   | MqttMetadata | Metadata from MQTT message |

`MqttMetadata`
| Field name             | Type    | Description                                  |
|:-----------------------|:--------|:---------------------------------------------|

> | clientId               | String  | MQTT client id                               |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| clientId               | String  | Uniquely identifies the MQTT client                                |
```

Author: Changed please check now

Reviewer 2: Thanks - change is good

> | messageId              | int     | MQTT message id                              |

Author: Changes, please check it now

> | dupFlag                | boolean | MQTT duplicate flag                          |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| dupFlag                | boolean | Indicates this message is a resend                           |
```

Author: Make sense, changed

| userProperties         | Map     | Reserved for future use of MQTT 5.0 features |
| payloadFormatIndicator | enum    | Reserved for future use of MQTT 5.0 features |
| contentType            | String  | Reserved for future use of MQTT 5.0 features |
| correlationData        | byte[]  | Reserved for future use of MQTT 5.0 features |
| responseTopic          | String  | Reserved for future use of MQTT 5.0 features |

> Luckily there is a [Java Client](/device-integration/mqtt-connect#java-client) which already contains classes 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [Java Client](/device-integration/mqtt-connect#java-client) contains classes 
```

No 'luck' involved - your's and Rohit's hard work!

> representing the above model, it also deals with AVRO binary format decoding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
representing the above model, and provides AVRO binary format decoding.
```

#### Payload restrictions {#mqtt-connect-payload-restrictions}

MQTT Connect doesn't force you to use any specific payload format. 
All the incoming MQTT messages must meet the specification in terms of fixed and variable headers, but the payload for published messages is unrestricted.
Just keep in mind that you will receive exactly the same set of bytes which was sent from the device in your custom microservice
and you have to convert them to {{< product-c8y-iot >}} compatible format.

{{< c8y-admon-info >}}
For all MQTT connections to the platform, the maximum accepted payload size is 1048576 bytes (1 MB), which includes
both message header and body. The header size varies, but its minimum is 2 bytes.
{{< /c8y-admon-info >}}

### Features {#mqtt-connect-features}

#### Authentication {#mqtt-connect-authentication}

Authentication types supported by MQTT Connect are:

> *   Username and password. The MQTT username needs to include the tenant ID and username in the format &lt;tenantID/username>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   Username and password. The MQTT username needs to include the tenant ID and username in the format &lt;tenantID&gt;/&lt;username>.
```
suggesting both open and close angle-braces for tenantID and username as they are separate placeholders

Author: Changed.

> *   Device certificates - not yet supported, will be added in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   Device certificates - not yet supported. This will be added in a future release.
```

#### ClientId {#mqtt-connect-client-id}

> The MQTT ClientId is a field to uniquely identify each connected client. ClientId may consist up to 128 alphanumeric characters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The MQTT ClientId field uniquely identifies the connected client. ClientId may consist up to 128 alphanumeric characters.
```

> The MQTT ClientId is a field to uniquely identify each connected client. ClientId may consist up to 128 alphanumeric characters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The MQTT ClientId field identifies the connected client. ClientId may consist up to 128 alphanumeric characters.
```
We say elaborate that his must be unique more strongly (better) on the next line.

Each client connecting to the MQTT Connect must have a unique client identifier, connecting a second client with the same identifier will result in the previous client's disconnection.

#### Quality of Service (QoS) {#mqtt-connect-qos}

The {{< product-c8y-iot >}} implementation supports 2 levels of MQTT QoS:

* QoS 0: At most once:
    - The client just sends the message once (fire and forget).
    - No response from the server.
* QoS 1: At least once
    - The client awaits server acknowledgment for each published message.
    - The client should re-send the message if there was no ack from the server.

>     - Possible re-send actions comes with no guarantee that the message was received and processed by the server only once.

Reviewer 2: Not sure if the 'Possible re-send ...' line reads clearly or makes sense (to me). Is there a 'not' missing ('... message was not received and processed ...'). Maybe I'm miss-reading this totally. I'm not sure what were trying to say here.

* QoS 2: Exactly once - not supported

For subscriptions, we will deliver all messages in the QoS that the client defined when subscribing to the topic.

#### Clean session {#mqtt-connect-clean-session}

MQTT Connect requires clean session to be set to "1" (true). We cannot guarantee that disabling clean session will work reliably, hence we recommend you to always enable clean session.

#### Retained flag {#mqtt-connect-retained-flag}

Retained flag is not supported, publishing data with the retained flag on the topic is allowed but has no practical difference to sending it without the flag.

#### Last will {#mqtt-connect-last-will}

In MQTT, the "last will" is a message that is specified at connection time and that is executed when the client loses the connection. 

> Last will is fully supported by MQTT Connect and like with any other publish messages you can use all allowed topic and any payload.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Last will is fully supported by MQTT Connect and like with any other publish messages you can use any unreserved topic and any payload.
```

### Return codes {#mqtt-connect-return-codes}

> 

Reviewer 2: suggestion: a few changes through the following paragraph

MQTT Connect follows the MQTT specification for server responses. For example, if invalid credentials are sent in the `CONNECT` message, the server response `CONNACK` message will contain the `0x05` return code.
The return code can be treated similarly to REST API HTTP codes, such as 401.

In terms of server response MQTT Connect follows the specifications. When there is an MQTT error, for example, if the given credentials are invalid,
server in response to the `CONNECT` message will return `CONNACK` containing `0x05` return code.
The return code can be treated similarly to REST API HTTP codes, such as 401.

### MQTT 5.0 features {#mqtt-connect-mqtt-5}

Support for MQTT 5.0 features will be added in the near future.

### MQTT TLS certificates {#mqtt-connect-tls-certificates}

MQTT Connect uses the certificates which are assigned to the main environment domain, it always sends these certificates during TLS handshake to devices.
Moreover, {{< enterprise-tenant >}}s are not able to customize those certificates via the SSL Management feature.

### MQTT Connect vs {{< product-c8y-iot >}} MQTT {#mqtt-vs-mqtt-connect}

> Below table presents basic comparison between already existing {{< product-c8y-iot >}} MQTT and the new MQTT Connect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The table blow presents a basic comparison between the standard {{< product-c8y-iot >}} MQTT functionality and that of MQTT Connect.
```

| Retained flag     | Not supported                             | Not supported                                                                            |
| Last will         | Supported                                 | Supported                                                                                |
| MQTT 5.0 features | Not supported                             | Supported in the near future                                                             |
| Authentication    | Basic and device certificate              | Basic, device certificate will be added in the future                                    |
| Scalability       | Together with {{< product-c8y-iot >}}     | Independent                                                                              |
| Topic format      | Determined by the SmartREST 2.0 protocol  | Unrestricted                                                                             |
| Payload           | Determined by the SmartREST 2.0 protocol  | Unrestricted                                                                             |

> | Extensibility     | Limited by SmartREST 2.0 custom templates | Unlimited thanks to Messaging Service utilization and custom microservice implementation |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Extensibility     | Limited by SmartREST 2.0 custom templates | Unlimited due to Messaging Service utilization and custom microservice implementation |
```
